An Analysis of Logic

This leads to a need to identify a logic for which these analyses can be derived. Namely a logic of the whole. The scientific mindset that pervades cause and effect logic systems necessarily removes all meaning from an object or an event. By stripping meaning away it is possible to identify how an object or an event will perform in detail. Given a very specific context scientific thinking will be able to describe what an object or an event will do. At the cost of truly understanding how life works, meaning is lost. This idea can be generalized to identify reasoning that loses the big picture to be able to work in the details. Scientific rationality is a very important tool and at the same time it is thought that there is no way to rationally analyze meaning. In the 1980’s and 1990’s the concept of left and right brain thinkers was promulgated. One of the foundational concepts within the left and right brain dichotomy was that rationality and logic reside purely within the left brain. While echoes of this dichotomy are still present as divisions between the sciences and the arts this false dichotomy continues to snare thinkers all through society. The idea that the left brain is the only seat of rationality is patently false. It is easy to see rationality as only residing in the left brain as a false dichotomy. There is just as much irrationality in the sciences, albeit of a different type, as there is within the humanities. Rationality is great for solving general problems. The amount of human suffering that science has provided the world is quantifiable and as a result science has been touted as a cure all for society’s problems. Yet the left brain’s method for solving problems is to look at the details and given a defined problem identify solutions. When a problem can’t be defined, a left brained logical solution is not possible. Consider for example all the factors that could be influencing a single choice, say deciding on a career. Immediately it is easy to see that the factors influencing this choice are infinite. Schooling, family life, and financial support are all critical factors and vary continuously. An infinite combinations of just these three factors is possible and yet there are unknown number of addition factors. Influences for one individual might be different for another. Indeed these are only the beginning of the possibilities influencing a career decision.

Science is revolutionary at solving problems in the aggregate, for defined problems. Prosperity in terms of lower food costs, better housing, access to globally shared technology has increased the comfort and earning potential for almost every individual human. But these gains were spread among almost everyone. As a result of which each most of humanity’s opportunities for success and growth have increased. Yet still it is easy to see that there are problems that science won’t be able to solve. Science which identifies general solutions from quantifying extreme detail is not an effective tool for solving detailed individual level problems. Formulating a logic for analyzing a whole generates specific solutions from quantifying whole categories of ideas. 

Further this report declares that rationality is as present in the right brain as it is within the left. It is illogical to accept all that science has produced in the last 100 years as being unassailablely true. Within the sciences it is well known that the validity of any study or experiment resides solely on the ability to remove all subjectivity from the process. Despite the best standards of logic there is always error. While it is true all scientists in our modern era must and do provide estimates of these errors the fact remains that this error is subjective. This subjective error can be conservatively increased or it can be liberally decreased. Supposedly true articles and reports produced by scientific thinking, which have found significance, are upheld as unassailable. It is evident that there are publications within the scientific community that directly contradict each other. Further there are many supposedly scientific significance that can not be repeated. Finally, some results found to be repeatable and extremely significant are of very little use in the real world, their utility being based on specific assumptions that can not be replicated in reality. Science can not solve hunger or give meaning within a meaningless world. 

While the rationality of science is beneficial to identify minute detail, indeed is necessary for understanding how to achieve a specific result, that specific detail is only one or even a few details within an infinite amount of detail. Even within one given situation, even a limited one there are an infinite number of details. Continuous properties like temperature and light can change the details involved in any real world situation. Outside the lab anything can happen and for such experiences it is necessary to develop a different type of rational logic based on wholes. This whole based logic will necessarily lose the ability generate global solutions, but will gain the ability to logically identify meaning on an individual level. 

Many will think that a logic based on wholes can not be achieved. For example the simple dichotomy of male versus female can never be rationally examine, for it has often been said that there will always be an exception to the rule. Further it could be said that since there is always an exception to the rule, there is no logical way to impose a formal whole based logic system. There is no utility in forcing the individual to obey constrictive rules such as that they must identify with either male or female. However, using the sexes example, it is easy to identify a logical system of the whole. Namely that there is a type of logic which is being discovered anew for quantum systems. Quantum particles obey a different sort of logic from the logic that is normally taught in schools. For example it would be logical for a particle to be quantifiable with certain defined characteristics, however quantum particles have a superposition of characteristics. This ability to have a superposition of characteristics is supposedly only for quantizable matter, only for very very small scales. Humanity’s scientists are just now exploring this world of quantum logic. Yet it might be the case that humanity is not familiar with quantum logic. It could be the case that humanity's greatest sages have already developed a logic for dealing with problems where a superposition of characteristics is possible. Scientific thinkers have disparaged ancient systems of thought which might have simplistically divided up the entire world into just four elements; earth, air, fire, and water. However, it could be true that the great thinkers of humanity were really just approaching the problem of quantum superposition on a macro scale. Indeed earth’s history is filled with similar systems that purported to classify the entire world down into simple dichotomies, trichotomies, and quadotomies. It is possible to reexamine the great theories of humanity in light of what scientists are learning about quantum logic in order to discover if there are any utilizable processes or systems. It is entirely possible to deal logically within wholes. It could be extremely easy to piggyback on what has been discovered in the past to identify a logic of wholes, identifying meaning and what is not meaningful. It is time for a new logical revolution to sweep through our overly sanitized world.


