Particle Theory of Personality
A quantum analogy

Introduction:
Personality systems proliferate across the internet. These systems often use concrete analogies to piggyback on a concept or idea that lends itself to describing a certain personality phenomenon. While it is instructive to develop these sorts of systems, concrete, in the box explanations leave a curious feeling of incompleteness. Many people often do use personality systems to both identify some universal truth about the human psyche and at the same time deny that the system has any power to describe them, to place them in a box. However, rational observers must throw out any identification of universal truth based on any system that puts humans within a box. It is illogical, if humans can’t be put in a box then those universal truths about how the psyche works must also be false. There is no concrete rational way to justify relying on wisdom gained from understanding personality theories. Yet countless individuals throughout the centuries have continued to look to personality theories for understanding. If this logic is sound then how are we to rationally understand why personality theories abound.

Further, while it is possible to rationally explore an analogy, the analogy itself defines the logical limits of the analysis. Comparing two related concepts, understanding can be acquired by discovering similarities. Normally these analogies focus on the cause and effect relationships between concepts. For example if we can understand that in one situation an action results in a specific outcome then theoretically that same result or something similar could be expected in related concepts. Except that for personality there is a limited facility with which it is possible to acquire understanding within the logical analysis of cause and effect. It is not possible to assert that a personality will perform any action exclusively as a result of a trigger. Most analogies fall short ineffectively describing relationships between commonly understood actions and personality ideas. For example, to explain the relationship between extroversion and introversion a supposedly simple understanding of the human excitatory response is often used. Simply extroverts receive energy from crowds while introverts receive energy from being alone. While instructive at a high level this analogy between the flush of speaking with others and extraversion falls short when we get into the details of how people interact. However, we can push the boundaries of an analogy, by changing the context in which we explore personality concepts. It is instructive to leave the realm of cause and effect entirely behind. Statistical analysis is the primary method whereby quantum particles are researched. Further quantum particles behave as if certain properties have discrete materializations just like in many personality theories. For example the quantum property of spin has two and only two states, either up or down. While quantum particle theories avoid the term, dichotomy, this is what the two spin states are, a dichotomy. Personality theories abound with dichotomies. Extroversion versus introversion is only one such dichotomy. For this reason it is beneficial to think of personality in quantum terms. Borrowing analogies from quantum systems allows us to overcome the cause and effect paradox, in that we can’t say that an extrovert will always behave in certain ways and have certain outcomes. Humans can not be put in a box. Thinking of personality within quantum terms is instructive. 

A rational thinker can embrace the fact that it is impossible to identify where a human, with a personality, can be located and plotted through a map of possible outcomes, just like it is impossible to identify the position and momentum of a particle with arbitrary specificity by the Schrodinger equation. Yet at the same time, due to the sometimes bizarre nature of quantum field effects a quantum particle has dualistic effects. Quantum particles can have superpositions which allow a single particle to have more than one state. For example the quantum quantity of spin always has a value of ½. A neutrino never deviates from this ½ value, but it can have either ½ up or ½ down. Until measured in some way it is impossible to identify a specific value for a given particle. Outside of very specific scientifically defined situations it is impossible to know whether a single neutrino has up spin or down spin. This is very much like how people behave, or at least how they conceive of themselves. If we take people at their word that they really can’t be put in a box, then perhaps it is best to assume that people behave in quantum-like ways. Only quantum effects are truly free. Free because they operate entirely outside the bounds of cause and effect, only statistical analyses can describe where a quantum particle will be. 

Yet at the same time quantum theories always have certain properties with discrete limited states. Spin and charge are examples of these limited quantum properties. While location can only be statistically analyzed, paradoxically discrete quantum properties are entirely known. These properties are disgustingly known. Once observed there is no mystery. Limited and unique it is entirely possible to understand all possible outcomes for these properties. So limited that, for example, quantum analysis allows an investigator to know without any doubt that there are only two outcomes for particle spin. To be assured knowing particle spin does not in any way contribute to identifying the location of that same particle. Knowing the position of a particle is completely divorced from knowing its quantum properties. 

If we were to assume that personality is not quantum. Then we have to assume that personality is predictable. Because quantum properties are not predictable. That is why particles can only be statistically known. If we can say that quantum means unpredictable then personalities must obey quantum rules. If particles do not obey quantum rules then they must be predictable. Further, to assume that personalities are not in some way capable of quantum effects means that there is some heretofore unknown way of defining a situation so that an individual’s decisions can be predicted. An investigator would know without any doubt what an individual would do and where they would be in the future. Yet we know from quantum research that from our 3 dimensional perspective it is impossible to know what humankind will do, let alone a specific individual. Taking this analysis as instructive allows a rational mind to then hypothetically use quantum effects as an analogy for personality theory.

The logic above is predicated on the idea that randomness itself is only possible within a quantum frame. That quantization means random and that random outcomes mean that quantization has occurred. That the thing of being random is a consequence of quantum processes. Therefore randomness is a subset of the broader category of quantum. It is well known that even with computer assistance it is impossible to create truly random output. Computers can take outside data in to create random data and they can create pseudo random data, but they can not create random output. Pseudo random output is output that is indistinguishable from truly random output. Basically computers are so good at approximating random output that they can fool anyone or any other computer. However pseudo random output is only possible as long as the inputs and programming are privileged. If you know the input and programming for a pseudo random output then the output is no longer random.

It can be shown that a quantum theory can be utilized as an analogy for understanding personality theory. Like with any analogy there will be some comparisons that are beneficial to understanding and some comparisons that are not beneficial. In the current analysis certain aspects of quantum theory will be borrowed to facilitate understanding. In other areas quantum theory won’t work as an analogy. In these areas logic and reasoning will subsume the role of quantum theory to flesh out areas of personality theory. The utility with which quantum theory does and does not work will be discussed. A real personality has more facets, capabilities, and options than current quantum theory allows for. At the same time to whatever extent it is instructive, as much of the Standard Model of Particle Theory as possible will be included, analyzed, and compared. This is done in order to facilitate the analogy. To reiterate, particle theory as far as is known currently is completely different from this personality theory.  In this analysis quantum theory will be used as an analogy to identify many fundamental components of the Standard Model within a personality context. Matter, anti-matter, and dark matter will be discussed. The forces themselves could also be described as part of personality theory and can be treated more in depth below.

The Observer
Like particles, an observer is critical to being able to define important components of personality. Without an observer personality retains amorphous field properties. These field properties are important and by themselves are valuable. So valuable in fact that they are the default description of personality that human beings can ascribe to personality. These personality field effects are described in many forms commonly. Any statement that reflects the discussion above about not being able to put a person in a box or that all outcomes are possible for an individual are all descriptions of quantum personality field effects. Indeed it is possible to reinforce and validate these common assertions using these field effects. Further the only factor that differentiates personality field effects from personality particle effects is the observer. Including the observer collapses the entire personality field into identifiable particles. The reverse is also completely true. An individual who refuses to observe forces the personality particles to resume their field properties. This refusal to observe is actually very beneficial for acquiring field effects. With only the one ability to remove observation a personality can retain  all of the benefits and forces of the field properties. That said the corollary is also true that with the presence of an observer it becomes possible to identify properties and forces that act on personalities. Measurement is possible. Statistically properties can be measured and quantum properties can be identified. Theoretically it can then be possible to understand how personalities interact and therefore build upon. 

The identification of the observer will hereby become a supporting pillar for quantum personality theory. The ability to refuse to observe retains for personalities the ability to form superpositions. Without an observer a personality can retain options for interaction. This identifies a quantum property and is fundamentally different from the observation of Newtonian objects. For example, refusing to observe the earth as a planet that revolves around the sun does not bequeath the earth with any superposition of properties. It is not then possible for the earth to revolve around a different sun or for the earth to stop revolving around the sun. The earth will continue to follow the exact same pattern that it has for the last however many epochs of time. The sun will come up in the morning regardless of whether any human actually looks up at the sky in the morning. If personalities have field effects like superposition of possible states then it must follow quantum laws.

With the identification of the observer the question comes up that if humans have the ability to observe then once observed are they then completely identified. The answer to the question is no. In humans the observer is a conscious capability, indeed observation is not the default state. Therefore it is impossible to always observe. Further it is impossible to observe to the 
Spin Theory
Having defined some basic ground rules it is now possible to begin the analogy. The simplest particles of quantum theory are neutrinos. Neutrinos have very little mass and only participate in the weak nuclear force. Neutrinos like all other particles have a position and momentum within a defined space. Another quality that neutrinos share with all other particles is spin. Spin can only have two states either up spin or down spin. The value associated with spin for the neutrino is always ½. No other value is possible. Not possible in this case is final and complete, disgustingly complete. In this way it can be defined as a quantum property such that its value is ½ and always is ½. This is way spin is a quantum property and it will not obey logical rules of cause and effect. Spin is limited to this very limited defined set of outcomes. So then by analogy we can define a personality property to have the same spin property. This personality ‘spin’ would have the same properties as particle spin. An individual could have up or down ‘spin’. This personality spin would obey the wave-particle laws such that while observed this facet of personality could be identified as either up or down, but that while unobserved this personality spin would revert to obeying wave functions. In other words there would be no way to know whether the personality was ‘spinning’ up or down. Further that if an observer was introduced to identify spin, the identified spin would be completely independent of whatever outcome had been previously identified. 

In quantum personality theory Spin describes the ability of a personality to obtain an up and a down state. However, it is necessary to hypothesize more fundamental properties to personality that are not necessarily present within particle theory. Spin has a set of four sub properties. Each of these subproperties retain the basic quantum properties of spin. That each of these fundamental properties exists in dichotomies. The up and down nature of spin is a dichotomy and likewise each of the four fundamental properties of spin also have a dichotomous nature. There are only the two sides of the dichotomy and no other possibilities exist. They are not continuous. That said it should be stated that while these four fundamental personality properties of spin are dichotomous they in no way restrict the personality particle to being located anywhere within a hypothesized map of personality space. Having these quantumized properties does not limit the personality particle from having any momentum either. Even further we could say that the quantized nature of spin allows for the complete freedom of the personality particle within the map of personality space.

It takes four pieces of information to create a three dimensional system. Indeed the four quantum properties of spin could define personality space itself. These four properties should not be mistaken for axises upon which our three dimensional world of personality hangs. Instead these properties truly are quantized data, information upon which rests and in turn which in turn is supported by our understanding of space. It can be said that time itself, the most ordered and reliable property in some way, is the foundation of these four quantized parts of spin. Because time is the bedrock upon which these properties are extruded into reality they do not obey the strict laws of one dimensional time which characterizes reality. It is upon this framework that it is possible to begin to understand and support the three dimensional nature of personality space.

These four pieces of information are two pairs of two all of which are orthogonal to each other, such that two together turn in perpendicular directions. One piece of information is only a point. A piece of information x is enough on its own and is full, no additional inference can be made with only the one datum. A second piece of information can interact perpendicularly with the first. These two pieces of information while full on their own can now be used together to identify a single point. In the same way the third and fourth pieces of information paired can identify a point. Furthermore these two pairs of separate information then interact with each other and because we now have four pieces of information not only is it possible to identify a 2 dimensional plane it is also possible to identify a three dimensional space. Where each pair alone can only identify a point, combining more is possible and a complete map of a 3 dimensional space space can be identified and a point within that space for position of any individual neutrino. This space with each neutrino identifying itself within that space can be mapped into a personality theory where a personality space can be defined. Notice that while the neutrino itself can have four discretely defined turns the location of the neutrino component of personality can be located anywhere within the 3 dimensional personality space. This means that this basic building block of personality is independent of where the neutrino is located. Any personality neutrino can be anywhere. These properties give neutrinos measurable qualities like position and momentum. (Matched pairs of position and momentum for particles as well as angular frequency and wave vectors.)

Light Matter
Four Properties of Spin
It is possible to identify the four pieces of information which define the light matter personality space with dichotomous labels. Each of these properties define a component of spin. Like spin itself each component has a direction, but instead of up and down the direction will be generally right or left. These components are purposely simplified to the point where the behavior can be identified at any level of analysis. The components are presented here with the left handed direction first and right handed direction second: stop/start, balance/imbalance, focus/diffuse, and repetition/original. So for example if we analyze the subcellular level it will be possible to find analogous processes for stopping versus starting, repeating a behavior versus allowing random mutation, balancing substances within the cell versus over producing one substance, and finally focusing by removing extraneous substances vs allowing or encouraging substances or processes. Looking at the human level of analysis it is possible to identify how humanity has taken each of these spins to a certain level of perfection. Physically stopping all movement to allow the mind to meditate. The repetitive behavior that is necessary to weave clothes or build a building. The balance that is required by acrobats to walk the highwire or juggle work, family life, and recreational time. And finally the focus that is required to navigate around the world or achieve distinction at work. 

These four components combine together to create Spin. The direction that can be observed in spin either up or down in our personality space is fundamentally different from the spin of the components. A personality will always have each direction of the components expressed either in the up or down position. So for example if a particular personality has stop, balance, repeat, and diffusion in the up position then the opposite handed components will be expressed in the down position: start, imbalance, orginality, and focus. Just like with a neutrino, the personality’s components are fixed with respect to each other so that when the spin alternates between up and down each component flips in tandem.  

The direction of spin reflects the defining characteristic of observation. A person’s awareness always follows the left handed direction of each component and the up position in spin. If the personality has all of its left handed components in the up spin position then the entire awareness will be focused. However, when one or more of the left handed components are in the down position awareness will be spread out. 

An additional component of spin is the force carrier. Just as in the Theory of Particle Physics force carriers are separated out from fermion particles. Called bosons, they are force carrying particles and behave according to different quantum rules from the fermions. Yet despite having some different properties from fermions, bosons still have the basic quantum distinctions. Namely that some properties of bosons are defined and can be nothing else. Further that because of these discrete limited properties bosons are able to express with fermions in personality space at any position and momentum, or angular velocity and wave vector. The force carrier for spin is called anxious/explorative. Anxiousness is force carrying because it is anxiety about an action. Anxiety will always result in an action if only because spin flips it will become exploration. Personalities with anxiety in the up position of spin will be more aware of and usually display more anxiousness. 
