To identify a map of consciousness it becomes necessary to be clear about what we say is conscious. First a coordinate system will be chosen upon which to locate events. Second, the logic that will be used to identify consciousness must be very clear. 

##Coordinate Systems:
To create a map of consciousness it is necessary to clarify what the space is that will be mapped. To do this a distinction between events and consciousness of the event must be identified. Herein events will be triggers to be mapped but are agnostic to the space. The theoretical space that can be measured is consciousness itself. For example the event of paper clipping can happen anywhere within the space. The map does not distinguish between paper clipping and eating an orange. Instead the map will be the framework upon which it is possible to measure the consciousness of the event. For any given individual the same event, clipping paper, can be low or high on the consciousness scale. It will be assumed for this analysis that while some activities might increase consciousness natively, eg: meditation, prayer. Even these activities, conducive to consciousness, can be done with varying degrees of actual consciousness. Further it is possible to do them with no conscious thought at all. Because any event can have a varying degree of consciousness it is necessary to divorce consciousness from any and all events. 

Objectively judging such personal events is only possible for the individual within their own mental landscape. From the perspective of another person it is impossible to judge. However, due to the fundamental nature of reality all actions, all events are interconnected. A single event has the potential to impact every other conscious life form sharing reality. So while it is impossible to know the consciousness with which a single life form interacts with reality it is possible for single individuals to know how an event affects their conscious ability to interact. In general there are three ways in which humans interact with this shared reality: statements, questions, and commands. Statements allow an individual to establish specific constructs within their own model for interacting with shared reality or ‘shality’. shality will mean shared reality. A moniker will be used since the idea of a shared reality will be a concept that will be used often within this analysis. This idea of shared reality is a subset of reality. Antishality will refer to the systematic removal of the shared conception of reality.  Reality then will consist of both objects and events which can be conceived of as having a shared instantiation within reality and what we usually think of as objectivity or reality when mutually conceived understanding is removed. Questions allow the manifestation of reality that the individual is currently interacting with to provide answers. Commands allow the individual to push an emotion or in rarer circumstances a more cognizant thought into reality. 

While there are three ways to interact with the shared consciousness there is a dichotomy of effect that these interactions have on the individual’s own consciousness. These interactions either increase or decrease the individual’s ability to interact with shared reality. A distinction must be made here between what we mean by shared reality and reality. 

A two dimensional coordinate system will be used to locate events within the space. What can be thought of as the x-axis will become the consciousness axis. Positive numbers on the line will designate increasing consciousness and will also be used to identify events. Negative points on the line will similarly be recognized as unconscious. The y-axis will be awareness where positive points on the line describe awareness and negative points in the y-axis as unaware. In this way these four quadrants will describe events in which we are conscious and aware, conscious but unaware, unconscious and aware, and finally unconscious and unaware. Examples are as follows. When describing an individual's actions perhaps it is easiest to describe events for which we are unconscious and unaware. Bodily functions like the action of the liver or kidneys are completely unconscious and usually we have no awareness of. Actoins that are conscious but there is no awareness might be an action taken consciously but without any real awareness. An individual might be conscious of the steps they are taking on a walk, but have a complete lack of awareness of the walk. An example of what is conscious and aware might be what the walker is thinking about, their day, the dog, their relationships. Finally it is important to identify the unconscious awareness. Taking the walker example again, the unconscious could be aware of sounds and threats in the nearby area. Completely unconscious these disturbances in the background do not usually merit conscious attention, but are tracked in the aware unconscious.

A second two dimensional coordinate system will focus on what is real. For this coordinate system the positive x-axis will be for truth while the negative x-axis will be falsehood. The positive y-axis will describe real objects and the negative for unreal or fantastic objects. An example will describe a movie. The least understood quadrant within this coordinate system will be the quadrant that identifies unreal falsehood. Most movies describe events and characters which are completely false and unreal. The quadrant which designates fantastic truth might be unlying meaning to the movie which gives a movie an ability to resonate. False reality could be situations within the movie that did not or could never happen and yet where great pains are taken to simulate reality the movie gains some connection to what might happen in real life. Finally, the real truth within a movie could give us a sense of the real and true connection that actors have with their environment or other actors. It doesn’t matter that the set is fabricated or the actors are portraying other individuals, whenever a truly real moment happens on a set, movie magic is possible.

While these two coordinate systems will be used to identify events and objects, it is possible to combine the consciousness axis with the truth axis as well as the other combinations identifiable within this framework. Also, while it is useful to identify a specific point within a coordinate system, this analysis will also discuss the coordinate system as a field. That when speaking of a field there is no specific point on the axis, instead this analysis will discuss a field as if it is present within all four quadrants at once. The above demonstrates this type of discussion, emphasizing that within one specific example of the walk and the movie all four quadrants were and to some extent had to all be described.

##Logic Systems:
This leads to a need to identify a logic for which these analyses can be derived. Namely a logic of the whole. The scientific mindset that pervades cause and effect logic systems necessarily removes all meaning from an object or an event. By stripping meaning away it is possible to identify how an object or an event will perform in detail. Given a very specific context scientific thinking will be able to describe what an object or an event will do. At the cost of truly understanding how life works, meaning is lost. This idea can be generalized to identify reasoning that loses the big picture to be able to work in the details. Scientific rationality is a very important tool and at the same time it is thought that there is no way to rationally analyze meaning. In the 1980’s and 1990’s the concept of left and right brain thinkers was promulgated. One of the foundational concepts within the left and right brain dichotomy was that rationality and logic reside purely within the left brain. While echoes of this dichotomy are still present as divisions between the sciences and the arts this false dichotomy continues to snare thinkers all through society. The idea that the left brain is the only seat of rationality is patently false. It is easy to see rationality as only residing in the left brain as a false dichotomy. There is just as much irrationality in the sciences, albeit of a different type, as there is within the humanities. Rationality is great for solving general problems. The amount of human suffering that science has provided the world is quantifiable and as a result science has been touted as a cure all for society’s problems. Yet the left brain’s method for solving problems is to look at the details and given a defined problem identify solutions. When a problem can’t be defined, a left brained logical solution is not possible. Consider for example all the factors that could be influencing a single choice, say deciding on a career. Immediately it is easy to see that the factors influencing this choice are infinite. Schooling, family life, and financial support are all critical factors and vary continuously. An infinite combinations of just these three factors is possible and yet there are unknown number of addition factors. Influences for one individual might be different for another. Indeed these are only the beginning of the possibilities influencing a career decision.

Science is revolutionary at solving problems in the aggregate, for defined problems. Prosperity in terms of lower food costs, better housing, access to globally shared technology has increased the comfort and earning potential for almost every individual human. But these gains were spread among almost everyone. As a result of which each most of humanity’s opportunities for success and growth have increased. Yet still it is easy to see that there are problems that science won’t be able to solve. Science which identifies general solutions from quantifying extreme detail is not an effective tool for solving detailed individual level problems. Formulating a logic for analyzing a whole generates specific solutions from quantifying whole categories of ideas. 

Further this report declares that rationality is as present in the right brain as it is within the left. It is illogical to accept all that science has produced in the last 100 years as being unassailablely true. Within the sciences it is well known that the validity of any study or experiment resides solely on the ability to remove all subjectivity from the process. Despite the best standards of logic there is always error. While it is true all scientists in our modern era must and do provide estimates of these errors the fact remains that this error is subjective. This subjective error can be conservatively increased or it can be liberally decreased. Supposedly true articles and reports produced by scientific thinking, which have found significance, are upheld as unassailable. It is evident that there are publications within the scientific community that directly contradict each other. Further there are many supposedly scientific significance that can not be repeated. Finally, some results found to be repeatable and extremely significant are of very little use in the real world, their utility being based on specific assumptions that can not be replicated in reality. Science can not solve hunger or give meaning within a meaningless world. 

While the rationality of science is beneficial to identify minute detail, indeed is necessary for understanding how to achieve a specific result, that specific detail is only one or even a few details within an infinite amount of detail. Even within one given situation, even a limited one there are an infinite number of details. Continuous properties like temperature and light can change the details involved in any real world situation. Outside the lab anything can happen and for such experiences it is necessary to develop a different type of rational logic based on wholes. This whole based logic will necessarily lose the ability generate global solutions, but will gain the ability to logically identify meaning on an individual level. 

Many will think that a logic based on wholes can not be achieved. For example the simple dichotomy of male versus female can never be rationally examine, for it has often been said that there will always be an exception to the rule. Further it could be said that since there is always an exception to the rule, there is no logical way to impose a formal whole based logic system. There is no utility in forcing the individual to obey constrictive rules such as that they must identify with either male or female. However, using the sexes example, it is easy to identify a logical system of the whole. Namely that there is a type of logic which is being discovered anew for quantum systems. Quantum particles obey a different sort of logic from the logic that is normally taught in schools. For example it would be logical for a particle to be quantifiable with certain defined characteristics, however quantum particles have a superposition of characteristics. This ability to have a superposition of characteristics is supposedly only for quantizable matter, only for very very small scales. Humanity’s scientists are just now exploring this world of quantum logic. Yet it might be the case that humanity is not familiar with quantum logic. It could be the case that humanity's greatest sages have already developed a logic for dealing with problems where a superposition of characteristics is possible. Scientific thinkers have disparaged ancient systems of thought which might have simplistically divided up the entire world into just four elements; earth, air, fire, and water. However, it could be true that the great thinkers of humanity were really just approaching the problem of quantum superposition on a macro scale. Indeed earth’s history is filled with similar systems that purported to classify the entire world down into simple dichotomies, trichotomies, and quadotomies. It is possible to reexamine the great theories of humanity in light of what scientists are learning about quantum logic in order to discover if there are any utilizable processes or systems. It is entirely possible to deal logically within wholes. It could be extremely easy to piggyback on what has been discovered in the past to identify a logic of wholes, identifying meaning and what is not meaningful. It is time for a new logical revolution to sweep through our overly sanitized world.

