Belinda,

Abstraction, is it Enough?

Following the argument that in order to really gain ground in personality research a consensus is needed, it should be obvious that an 
insistence on one side of a dichotomy is fatal to any kind of unity. Early in my own fledgling understanding of personality theory I was 
very addicted to ideas about the superiority of abstraction. Being able to think in the abstract and finding shared bonds with so many 
disaffected individuals was a heady experience. The excitement and sense of growth that grew out of those interactions were priceless.

I have clung onto the hope that those ideals can be pursued in much more depth. I don’t want the vision of providing power to the 
oppressed to be gainstayed. However, looking back at it now I am stunned with the ineffectual outcomes of our group. 

In the last couple of months I have started wondering if it wouldn’t be appropriate to take some time to identify a cause among the 
concrete. When I was in Alex’s inner group I often had conversations with him about how to use language carefully so that he would not 
offend concrete individuals. What is more, he did not want to offend sensitive abstracts with angry or condemning language towards 
concrete individuals.

While being completely on board with Alex’s group and his theories on personality I often conflicted with him, at least inside, with his 
views on the S/N relationship. I argued with him about the F/T, E/I, and P/J dichotomies as well, but it was the S/N that was at the 
core of his theory and interest. At the heart of it there was a definite lean towards the N camp. I don’t believe anyone familiar with 
his style of communication or his personality theories would disagree. 

I have often thought that there was more to the S side of the dichotomy then Alex was willing to share or maybe even understand. I now 
believe that the over emphasis on intuition and abstraction has pinned an upper threshold for the success he can have. In other words 
without setting a stage where both sides of that dichotomy can have a rich base and understanding bias will result. In the face of bias, 
well meaning, but ultimately amoral individuals can gain a standing and overwhelm any good that might have come.

Instead I propose that we take a different approach, instead of playing on the emotions of one limited segment of society I think we 
should instead base our clarion call on integrity. But not just integrity alone, instead a sliding scale of integrity. Where an individual 
outcome can have a value of integrity. An act can have no integrity, no morality, or it can have some component of integrity all the way 
up to and including some mythical act which is completely integrous. 

But further, I think it is important to subdivide abstract and concrete actions between integrous and non-integrous actions. Specifically 
to say that abstraction by itself is not integrous. Neither is concrete thinking/acting. It is important to say that just because one is 
abstract does not mean that one is being moral. 

Having identified a tentative foothold for basing our personality theory on integrity, it becomes necessary to further define what this 
means in the context of concrete action. While some might say that only those who are abstract have the ability to be completely integrous. 
The truth of the matter is that there is a deep and abiding lack of integrity, albeit in certain forms in Alex’s old group. 

So what would an integrous concrete look like? I believe we need to flesh this out a little more deeply, however it seems like the one 
thing that the old group lacked was a real adherence to honor. Don’t get me wrong, Alex portrayed honor deeply and enthusiastically. 
However, in the general group there was a lack of appreciation for any certain way of proceeding. 

Really it was interesting with so many different individuals, sometimes competing, there was no one method/way of proceeding. Everyone’s 
morals had to be sidelined or extracted. It was not in an obvious way, because throughout Alex did champion integrity. However, in order to 
be truly abstract in all ways it is necessary to relax one’s morals in order to think from someone else’s point of view. 

Personally, I believe that Alex showed the group his integrity to the personality theory and I don’t believe anyone could doubt his genuine 
care and interest. However, without the corresponding ability to be morally concrete it was impossible for the rank and file group member to 
really comprehend or walk the fine line between the two. Alex did it because he had a deep understanding of the N. The only way he could have 
that understanding was because he had just as deep and crucial understanding of the S. His choice was to reject the S, but in only ever 
describing it in generally negative terms he was able to dismiss it. 

It is at the root of my theory that we are all both N and S, though. We can never truly understand our N until we have gained just as much of 
a depth of understanding of the S. 

As you will no doubt understand from my previous discussion of Odin’ solution, I believe that everyone is currently balancing the two sides 
of position and momentum. Some reject any formal acknowledgement of either, some reject one side completely, and some balance both. Each of 
these perspectives can be widened and detailed out for this dichotomy between the S and the N. Basically I am saying that by putting integrity 
as the core value instead of abstraction we will be able to juggle between S and N parts of our lives.

-Brigham
