Belinda,

Odin’s Solution

Uncertainty at the heart of personality theory presents a very awkward problem. In our modern day infatuation with science and 
technology presenting a theory fundamentally based on uncertainty is ludicrous. This uncertainty means that science can not be 
used to prove any tenets of the theory. However, before we reject the scientific method I believe that it is important to 
reanalyze the nature of uncertainty.

Eschewing modern day science, it might be interesting to borrow the wisdom of a previous age. For me the various god traditions 
hold ways and means of interpretation. I would never pin a certain myth as meaning only one thing or assigning only one application. 
However, for the purposes of describing certain circumstances I would like to use the Norse god of heroes. Specifically, I have 
become enraptured with the idea of Odin’s eyes. Odin has one blind eye and one all seeing eye.

I have a fascination with all things quantum related and so of course I haven’t missed the correlation between Odin’s eyes and the 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle. At least for me! In the Heisenberg uncertainty principle it is impossible to know the position and 
the momentum of a particle perfectly at the same time. While theoretically it is possible to know the exact position, doing so means 
that all information about the momentum of the particle is lost. The reverse is also true. If we know the exact momentum of a particle 
then we can no longer identify the position. Practically speaking it is always better to give up on finding the exact position or 
momentum. Instead, allowing some uncertainty to mask the position and momentum at the same time allows us to know in general terms both 
the position and momentum.

However, in my romantic view of the all father, Odin does not compromise. Instead of allowing uncertainty to blur his sight he gives up 
one of his eyes in order to focus preternaturally on only one aspect. Holding off for now on identifying which aspect, position or 
momentum. Odin loses all ability to view a single aspect, but for the other he gains exceptional insight. Let's talk about how this 
might apply to personality theory, by giving some examples from Alex’s old personality group.

One of my old problems with Alex’s old personality group has always been the lack of success of any of the original founding members. 
It boggles my mind why none of us were able to succeed to any great degree. With access to the secrets of the universe, some hyperbole 
I understand, why couldn’t we immediately apply our knowledge and become if not billionaires then why not sages of great renown. With 
such great insight there should be accompanying power, right? Right…? Wrong.

After wrestling with this problem for years, I finally found some peace on the issue with the Heisenberg uncertainty principle and 
Odin’s solution. In order to understand this analogy it is necessary to take a leap of faith and assume that in some form or another a 
human being has quantum properties. We can pass back and forth ideas about whether a human’s quantum properties are the sum of all the 
quanta acting separately or whether a human can be thought of as a single quanta. Either way, if we make this leap then we can apply the 
position versus momentum uncertainty to individual people. Upon applying the principle then the more we identify the position of a person 
the more we lose the ability to see the momentum of a person. 

So to provide examples of this let’s take the individuals in Alex’s personality group. Further, let’s associate the position of a person 
with their ‘type’ and the momentum of a person with their ‘success’. Their momentum could be small or large and hence their success could 
be small or large, increasing or decreasing. It doesn’t matter. What matters is that once we shared with someone the basic principles of 
typing their momentum, their momentum, their success tanked. 

Indeed we can look back and say that the individuals that learned the most about Alex’s methods for typing and were successful at 
understanding almost immediately lost all success. Now looking at Alex himself we find the most extreme example of this. For the first 
couple of years I let Alex stay in my town house. He wouldn’t get a job. I bought food for him, but he also relied on his other friends 
to eat and find clothes. His material success was almost completely gone. I think it was non-existent. However, he more than any of the 
rest of us had understood the personality system.

In the last ten years I have noticed that Alex has become much more successful. And while naively this might invalidate my claim I would 
like to suggest that to the degree in which Alex has corrupted his old theories and lost his old insistence on the exact type, he is able 
to find success. Of course I understand that there are a lot of factors at play and it would be impossible to determine exactly how much 
he has shifted away from his old precision on position (type), but we can look at other people’s experience to gain more and more confidence 
in this uncertainty principle.

Odin as the king was completely dependent on his subjects to provide for him. He was in the perfect position to gouge out one of his eyes and 
focus solely on one physical quantity. After becoming a king, let’s say he gave up on maintaining his momentum (success). By gaining extreme 
knowledge about position (type) he would become wise beyond all understanding. Because this is the great prize at the end of the road to 
understanding our position. Pure wisdom of the soul is the final reward for anyone who pursues personality. All our greatest wisdom traditions 
tell us that in order to find the wisdom we must forsake all our treasure. We must live in destitute conditions in caves, away from the world. 

We can have either enlightenment or wealth. We can’t have both. Yet, Odin did. He was a great king, most powerful of all the Norse Gods. How 
did he have both?

So how do we as individuals who are approaching the idea of personality theory deal with this fundamental law of the universe? As I see it, in 
its most basic frame, there are only four possibilities. The first way to solve the type/success trade off is to ignore both. This is the 
solution that most people find. The number of people who at some point in their lives throw in the towel on becoming wise and/or becoming 
successful is uncountable. Why are there so many people who live mundane lives? This is the reason. The uncertainty principle forces people to 
compromise between wisdom and power. You can’t have both to any great degree and so it is easier to subsist on the indirect wisdom and power of 
the society. 

The second and third solution to the uncertainty principle is to focus on one or the other to the exclusion of the opposite. These two solutions 
require an individual to act in the extreme. If they choose the wisdom path, then they must give away all their power. If they choose the success 
path then they must give up their ability to understand type. It is only through understanding our types that morality becomes possible. Without 
the ability to recognize our differences and similarities morality becomes nonexistent. If everyone is the same then anything is possible. If 
anything is possible then it becomes incumbent upon us to do everything that we want. Often doing anything we want becomes disregarding morality. 
Why limit ourselves? When differences between people are nullified then anything is justified.

The final solution is compromise. In exchange for giving up the ability to truly know yourself you can fudge the edges and gain some momentum 
(success). Small successes are better than no success. However, this solution is the most unsatisfactory. It is hard to be tempted by greater 
success or greater personal self mastery and not succumb to the lures and temptations on either side.

My own thoughts on this matter make me thankful for time. Time is a godly attribute. It is through time that we can find ways to overcome the 
position and momentum uncertainty. One way of implementing the compromise solution is to take dips in both sides of the divide. For a certain 
amount of time identify your type (position) and then move on with success (momentum).

Solutions involving time can be further investigated. For example dedicate a certain amount of time to both endeavors. But with one caveat, that 
one of those endeavors be completely anonymous. By making one anonymous the observer effect can be mitigated in some ways. Maybe? Probably? We 
will have to test this out.

Another solution is to work together in a group where some people choose each of the four different solutions. The reasoning behind this is that 
everyone would be able to benefit from the wisdom of the people focusing on type and everyone would be able to benefit from those focusing on 
success. There would also be the individuals who would not need to focus on either, instead they might focus on just enjoying the benefits. And 
finally the ones who purposefully balance both to one degree or another could bridge the gap however possible. 

As for us, I believe that before we even start to really get into personality research together we must define and identify our roles. I want to 
be upfront with you. If you want to seek wisdom’s path, I am fine with that. If you want to seek success’s path, I am fine with that. If you want 
to take the first solution and dabble here and there, I am fine with that. Finally if you want to take the path of consciously balancing your 
wisdom and success, I am fine with that. However, based on what you decide I think we need to know what each other’s path is so that we can support 
each other and find other friends to support us in shoring up the paths that we don’t choose.

For me wisdom’s path is most alluring. However, whether I like it or not, I have found that I have chosen by default to tread the path of 
compromise/balance. I have not been able to bite the bullet and go all in completely into wisdom’s path. Instead, I have always been lured over to 
achieve some success in my life. Instead of looking at this as a negative, I have started to realize that if I want to propagate these personality 
theories then I do have to have some modicum of success. It is necessary for me to provide a way for others to pursue wisdom’s path or success’s path.

I do feel that the proving of any personality system we create will be on success’s path. Basically by creating a system whereby we can purposefully 
set people on success’s path by removing or obfuscating their understanding of type (position) then we can test whether they can find more success. If 
more people find success in this way then we can slowly move more and more towards proving that personality theories. 

Here in the Washington D.C. area I have met and interacted with a few people who provide training. Some of whom were personality training 
mentors/teachers. Basically they teach some personality theories and hope that those theories help people get along more and make them more productive. 
After postulating this personality uncertainty theory my conclusion is that all such training might actually hurt more than help, at least with 
achieving success. 

So I want to put something together that is the complete opposite, but in a weird way. Theoretically the opposite in the extreme would basically mean 
that we could knowingly remove or mentor against personality theory tenets. Only someone who really understands personality theory could do this to any 
great degree. Because we can type people, use our ability to understand interactions, and provide stability we would be the best people to actually 
remove any barriers of position (type) from a workplace. I do not recommend doing this entirely, instead in a focused way. Some jobs might need more 
wisdom than others. Some might need more wisdom at certain points. 

Since all places of work would require at least some success, we could work with companies to capitalize on that success mindset. In some way every 
business would have to have success., momentum be their ultimate goal. 

On the other hand within our own organization we could house the opposite. A group of individuals who are willing to give up all success could be our 
wisdom think tank. We would have to support these individuals as well as provide some kind of consensus from which they could communicate and agree. But 
from this group we would expect that they might not be able to function in the real world at all. If they become so focused on type, theoretically they 
would lose all ability to take care of themselves. Instead we could take care of them. Of course we would make sure that they were able to still conform 
to the consensus and contribute positively towards the whole. Wisdom would be the ultimate outcome. I believe that we could make a group like this actually 
work if we instituted some basic policies. For example, in addition to being able to form a consensus only those who can live off their own interest could 
be accepted. 

Of course the details are not defined yet. We have a lot to discuss and create some sort of consensus in the first place. But these are the hard facts of 
personality research that we must acknowledge and deal with from the beginning.

-Brigham
