Belinda,

The Problem with Personality Theories:

Consensus has never been achieved. While I personally gained enormous power and ability from listening to, understanding, and then 
applying Alex’s theories on personality I find that I can’t share this knowledge with anyone. They don’t listen and often the feedback 
I receive is that I am too overzealous in pushing personality theories. Me a zealot? Sure, maybe … if you are blind.

First to clarify, when I say I gained enormous power and ability you must understand that when I first met Alex I was living in my 
grandmother’s basement, going from job to job, flunking out of college, and couldn’t seem to date anyone long term. By long term I mean 
that I couldn’t get more than three dates. I was depressed, I would often think about death, and had practiced suicide many times. At 
the time I had made a deal with myself to commit suicide by holding my own breath. If I had the willpower and drive to hold my own 
breath till I died, then I thought I could die with no regrets. Fortunately or unfortunately, I was so weak I couldn’t do it. No matter 
how many times I tried, I just couldn’t hold my breath long enough. Further, I couldn’t hold my breath long enough to actually learn any 
breathing techniques. I was that weak. 

Now, I have my own house, a steady job for ten years now, graduated from college, and married with three kids. I still reflect back on 
death occasionally. Every once in a while, I try to hold my breath until I can’t anymore. But it is rare and it is mostly a fun game to 
play instead of a serious suicide attempt. So, all in, yeah, for me enormous power and ability just means being able to live a normal life. 

Yet, at least from my point of view, with so much power on the table, why can’t people get a grip, find a consensus and move on to becoming 
even more happy and fulfilled. You would think that with so much power to change lives Alex’s personality theories should take the world by 
storm. You would think that everyone would be hammering away at extending the theories into even more aspects of life. You would think 
everyone would be falling all over themselves to find out about the little bits of revelation everyone else has. You would think that we 
would all be desperate to relate to each other, figure out our differences, and become more powerful as a result.

But this is not what we do instead we argue and ostracize. I mean I am not against a little intellectual sparring. There is room within the 
personality theories to have contradictory points of view. However, even about the simplest of ways to observe the world we argue. So why 
can’t we find consensus? Well, it probably has to do with the nature of personality to begin with. Suppose that at its heart personality 
theory contains a modicum of uncertainty. What if uncertainty is not something to argue about, but actually a built in key functionality of 
personality itself. 

If this were to be true then the vicissitudes of life would automatically engender thousands of years of arguing about personality. Oh, wait, 
that is exactly what we have.

If uncertainty is a fundamental part of personality then we are doomed to argue and struggle for however many thousands of years into the 
future. Only the lucky few that for some odd reason are able to break through the confusion and somehow see a greater whole among the 
conflicting parts could gain any benefit from personality theories. 

I believe that many people actually do gain a glimpse of the power within knowing ourselves, knowing our personalities. This is why personality 
theory websites, tests, and chat groups abound on the internet. However, few actually find any real enduring substance that they can orient 
their lives upon.

For me I feel some sort of physical pain knowing that there is a knowledge base that could be of service at the very least for dealing with 
depression, pain, you name it really, but we as humans are too caught up in our own drama to find that consensus. To a certain extent I think 
we must struggle on our own. We must all find within ourselves the power to overcome all the hurdles that life throws out at us. However, to 
the extent that we are trapped overcoming the same hurdles every generation we are trapped. To the same extent that technology has overcome 
the hurdles of providing food, water, and shelter we can at the same time provide psychological technology so that while everyone will still 
need to overcome their own mental hurdles they can be provided paths for doing so. These would have to be to some extent all possible paths. 
But imagine how many psychological hurdles that we are never able to overcome, because we are struggling with the same nonsensical mental trials 
that our ancestors did generation in and out.

I believe that we can find a consensus. I believe that we can take a step back and accept the uncertainty within personality theory. I believe 
that by accepting and quantifying this uncertainty we can allow for each other’s different opinions on personality theory. We can get meta about 
this and take a long step back. By accepting other people’s views we can even challenge them to take a further step into the dark on their path. 
We can even identify areas in which not many people are pushing. In our differences we can become much more powerful. 

In the end, however, we need consensus before we actually have consensus. We need people who are strong enough to agree to work together to even 
begin to create this consensus on personality theory. While the way can be paved by one of us alone, it can not truly become realized without much 
more input. Without a few more people’s insights, questions, or even disagreements the theories can not truly become valuable.

So, what do I want from you? I think that you are moral, I think you have the ability to question your own work. Further, I think you have a 
valuable contribution to make that is all your own. I want you to help me create a consensus on personality theory. It doesn’t have to be the only 
consensus personality theory. It doesn’t have to be great or awe inspiring. It just has to create a viable method beginning to further our pursuit 
of excellence. In the end I am just power hungry, I want more. I want to be able to go from having my own little nice life, to being able to share 
that nice life with others. While my words above might seem to be waxing grandiose really in the end I am just focused on this very selfish goal. I 
want to become even more powerful and have even more ability. I want to pass that on to my kids and I want to pass that on to my friends.

-Brigham
